So each time we turn the tape over, then we have that
15-second protective delay.
Now, first, Professor Fleming, I'd like to know
what interested you in the sea. Why did you choose
the sea as a profession? Well, I was studying as a
chemist at the University of British Columbia and
completed my bachelor's degree in 1929 and stayed
on at the the University of British Columbia, take
a master's degree in chemistry. And this, as you
should recognize, was the beginning of the
Depression. And it was quite obvious to me that
there were more chemists than were going to be
needed, and that it was particularly difficult to
obtain any sort of graduate degree. student
support in chemistry, and I had become somewhat
bored with the field of chemistry and thought I'd
better seek some other area. And I'd grown up right
by the water, and many of my friends were
essentially marine biologists, and I happened to
hear about this field called oceanography, and it
seemed very intriguing. So I was able to obtain a
research assistantship at Scripps Institution,
Bahia, California, in 1931, down there.
Had you not been to Scripps before you acquired it?
No. In those days, one didn't travel very much, and
it was a major expedition to get to Southern
California. Actually, I went down by ship. And did
you know with whom you wished to work at Scripps
when you went? Not really. I expected to work in
chemistry, and at that time the chemist at Scripps
was Eric Moberg, and I did essentially work with
him for a number of years, although I moved out of
the field of chemical oceanography after a few
years. game involved in sort of descriptive
physical oceanography. Now, how long were you at
Scripps? Well, I was there as a graduate student
for four years, and I completed my Ph.D. in 1935,
and then was kept on in sort of research capacity
for one year just as an assistant, and then they In
1936, I was appointed as an instructor on the
faculty at Scripps, and this was at the time that
Harold Fairgroup had just been appointed and came
in as the director, which he did in September of
1936. When did you first acquire the idea of the
textbook that became the standard in the field?
more or less by accident, as a lot of these things
do, that Scripps had never had any particular
program in sort of education. And when Harold
Spherdrup came as the director, he felt that we
ought to be doing more in this line, and he started
some summer courses in in oceanography, sort of a
general survey course, and he and Martin Johnson
and I were the principal lecturers, and the
Prentice Hall Publishing Company apparently
heard about this through their grapevine and came
down and suggested that we write down our lecture
notes, and being all innocent, we said yes, we
would be willing to do so. And it was out of this
summer course in oceanography that the volume on
the oceans finally appeared. It took us about
three years to write it, and it was finished in
1942. What sort of work were you doing at Scripps
while you were there? Oh, I went down. Do you mean as
a graduate student? As a graduate student and then
always. I was sort of Jack of all trades and have
been, I think, all my career. But my principal
interest was originally in some sort of chemical
work, and I did some work on the calcium carbonate
problem, something on nutrients. and used to
participate
in the very limited sort of seagoing program we had
in those days. And then in 1932, I was given a leave,
in a sense, and went up to Berkeley, to the
University of California, to get a little bit more
coursework and to prepare for my general
examinations. And when I came back to Scripps from
there, early in 1933,
I was told that the Navy wanted somebody to go down
to Central America to carry out some
oceanographic work on board one of the naval
vessels. I went down and joined the USS Hannibal,
which was a vessel used by the then Navy
Hydrographic Office, and spent several months
down off the west coast of Panama and Costa Rica
doing just sort of the field routine which had
already been sort of planned. And when I got back to
La Jolla, they said, well, why don't you write up
the results? And so this actually turned out to be
my doctoral thesis and got me into sort of
descriptive physical oceanography. That was
what I was interested in, is when did you get this
first descriptive oceanography that you were in
in the early 30s? And you stayed with that, though,
for two or three years. I think of you more there
than as a chemical oceanographer. Oh, yes. I
haven't really done any chemical oceanography.
since that time, really, because as
soon as I had finished up my thesis on this
particular material, why, Dr. Sverdrup had
arrived and
was very anxious to start a more kind of systematic
program of field work. And this developed in a sort
of indirect way, as many of these enterprises did,
in that the California Fish and Game Commission
was at that time concerned with the problem of the
distribution and abundance of California
sardines and wanted to do some oceanographic
work. made available to Scripps the use of a small
patrol vessel called the Bluefin. And in the early
spring, and I think it extended up into the summer
of 1937, we got our first systematic series of
observations off the Southern California coast.
And this continued and so on, so we became very much
involved in essentially the regional
oceanography off the coast of California. Who
worked in the sardine fisheries activities with
you? Well, we just did a
certain amount of work on conventional physical
oceanography.
a little bit of chemistry and some work on the
plankton. We never became at that time directly
involved in any of the fish studies, but the
federal government had also become very much
involved in the problem, and the two people that we
dealt with a good deal were Alton B. Setty and
Lionel Walford, both of what was then, I think, the
Bureau of Commercial Fisheries, although they
changed their names often. I'm not quite sure of
this one. But they were very much involved in the
fisheries aspect and also the state fisheries.
And the man in the state fisheries with whom we work
very closely now at USC is Richard B. Tibby. run
across, and he came down after a year or two and
actually finished his PhD at Scripps on the
oceanography of the California coast. Now, this
is really the first time the Pacific coast is being
mapped, is when you're mapping it now in these
several years. Were you surprised about certain
things? Well, I think it's Yes and no.
Because of the interest in the sardine problem,
the region was more or less prescribed for us. And
yet within that area, which extended off the
coast, I imagine about a couple of hundred miles,
They wanted considerable detail, so I think one of
the things that was rather original was the fact
that we made repeated studies on a fairly closely
spaced network of stations. This showed details
that were essentially unanticipated,
certainly.
Professor Sverdrup in particular became very
interested in the role of upwelling as it affected
these waters to the south of Point Conception. And
I think we had some of the first evidence on the
existence of eddies in the area that these sort of
features had not been identified before.
Who was joining you in Scripps between, let's say,
35 on? You seem to have a whole series of people come
in at Scripps about this time who go on. Well, the
biggest change has occurred,
I feel, in about 1920. which was just about the time
I went there as a graduate student, and that Dr.
Vaughn, who was the director, had been able to get
some additional funds, and he had a really very
imaginative sort of view of what ought to be done at
that time, and he added two faculty people, and
Claude Zobel in microbiology, and Dennis Fox
essentially in physiology and biochemistry.
This represented a major kind of shift in what was
going on at Scripps. In the physical area and the
field work where There were no sort of major
additions to the
faculty and staff, except during these years we
had considerable support from people who were
provided to the institution under the WPA, the
Works Progress Administration. One of the
curious things is that the illustrations in my
thesis were all drawn by man whose background had
been in architecture and was being supported on
these federal funds, and all my graphs looked like
architectural drawings. But we had considerable
staff support, technician support in those days
from people who were assigned to scripts under the
WPA program. Gene LaFond was one person who worked
very closely with this program, with and I. And
that was about it. Things weren't quite as large as
they are today. Did you find much exchange among
the faculty in that time? In other words, were you
able to come to, let's say, people like Martin
Johnson and talk about your problems, many
meetings, this sort of thing? Not particularly.
As far as the kind of research work was concerned,
everybody did their own particular job, but as I
mentioned a few minutes ago, we did collect
plankton samples on these cruises. The
phytoplankton were examined by Mr. Allen and His
associate, Easter Kopp, and Mark Johnson and his
assistants and students did the work on the
zooplankton. So, yes, and the group was small
enough that you did sort of see everybody
frequently, and there was a good deal of exchange.
But it was not a, it didn't by any means involve all
of the activities that at Scripps or all the
faculty.
When does Roger Revell get to Scripps? Well, he
arrived a month or two after I did in the summer of
1931 and came down to work on the sediment samples
that had been collected on the cruise of the
non-magnetic vessel Carnegie during I think it
was 1928-29
and he was to carry out this examination
of the material under the direction of Dr. Vaughan
but he also got interested in a number of things and
we worked together on several problems, one of
them concerning the solubility of calcium
carbonate and the precipitation of calcium
carbonate in seawater. And he also used to
participate in some of these cruises that we made
before the sardine investigations began in 1937.
In fact, he and I used to take the research vessel
out most of the time when acted as captain and
deckhands. We had only a one-man crew who was the
engineer on the small vessel that was available.
It's been suggested to me recently that one of the
problems with the modern oceanographers is they
don't get their feet wet, so to speak. They don't
spend enough time on vessels. Would you agree with
that? Well, yes and no. I think the
character of the work at sea has changed as the
vessels have become much larger and as the
equipment has become much more complex, and that
the vessel we had and the the times I'm talking
about prior to the sardine surveys was just called
the scripts and she was a 55 foot trawler type
vessel with a one man permanent crew and so the
graduate students in general used to take out and
run the ship essentially navigate as necessary do
all of the sampling do all of the sort of deckhand
functions, as well as work on the samples after
they were back in the laboratory. Now it's more
like, I have the feeling, as a graduate student
goes out, it's more or less like going on an ocean
liner, that they're just, in a sense, kind of a
passenger on a big, relatively large vessel. They
have very little to do with the planning or with the
navigation, the operation of the vessels at sea,
and usually don't know very much about what's
going on except the specific sort of project
they're engaged in. So I think we've lost
something in this process, and
there's still some, I think, activities of the
type that I'm reminiscing about that are
conducted in some nearshore work at various
institutions. But still, I find the students have
a very sort of narrow concept of what goes on. There
we go. About 15 seconds here. What do you mean? It
pauses now? Yeah, I've got a 15 second delay to make
sure we don't overtake.
Now, it's also been suggested that with the advent
of the computer in terms of collecting data and
evaluating it and so forth, particularly
concerning physical oceanography, that the
physical oceanographer loses touch with what
he's doing. Would you agree with that? Well, I
certainly would, and that's one of the things that
has bothered me a good deal in recent years is that
as the capability to take more data and to use a
computer for various processing, routine
processing, compilation, manipulation,
compilation analysis, plotting, and so on, that
the younger scientists don't have the kind of
familiarity with the specific information that I
think we had in years gone by. I think I can say with
some confidence that I used to know every
observation that had ever been made in most of the
Pacific Ocean. And there weren't very many, but I
knew every one and could evaluate
it. I knew whether it was good or bad. I knew how it
was related to other observations and so on. And
this kind of an intimacy is certainly being lost
today, students may not even see the set of
original data in any form. Times have changed, and
I'm harking back to a condition that will probably
never prevail again, but I think something has
been lost here.
When you began to plan your voyages, let's say
around 37 or 38, I'm interested in how you made your
decisions, where to go, what to do. Was it pretty
well dictated by the fisheries itself, or were you
pretty free to do what you wanted to do? No, I would
say that we were fairly free. I'm
talking only in terms of really one more or less
specific of operation, but within a rather
general frame of reference, why we were allowed to
plan our own program, and of course it was
discussed with Alton Setty and Lionel Offord and
others that were involved, but in general I think
we decided what should be done and how it should be
done and where to plan and so on. And that there
was a considerable freedom in choice here in what
we did. The other thing we were able to do at that
time was to work out a fairly set of comprehensive
programs as far as types of information gathered.
There's certainly a case always of trying to
optimize what we could do, because we had very
limited resources in terms of money and people and
equipment. So we had to select fairly carefully
what we felt we could do. I have to remember that
most of this was even before the days of the whole
mechanical bathysemir graph, the VT. In fact, we
had the experience of working with I think it was BT
number 5, which was sent to us in the spring of 1941
by Woods Hole when nobody even knew whether the
instrument would function properly and had no
kind of experience with the kind of information
you could get with a device of that kind.
When you were at Scripps in this period, was there
much contact with international oceanography?
Did you have any international oceanographers
come through? Yes, we used to have quite a few
visitors, at least relatively speaking, in that
Professor Vaughn, who was the director from,
actually I think it was from 1924 until 1936,
had been relatively active in sort of
international ocean activities. matters, and
had a number of friends and professional friends
in foreign countries, Japan, Europe, and so on,
and we were one of the relatively few places that
anyone interested in the ocean would come to visit
in the United States. What I'm trying to say is
there weren't very many places to visit, so we saw a
good many of the of the distinguished people from
other areas. And then when Professor Sverdrup
came in, he had a very close bonds with many, many
people in different fields and different
countries, and this sort of continued in a way. And
I can remember, in particular, we had one or more
visits from Helen Hansen, a Norwegian
oceanographer, and so we had reasonably good, I
feel, in some ways, maybe better contacts than we
have today. Now, when you were involved in this in
the 30s, was there sort of a sense of excitement
about moving out towards a new frontier? No, I
don't think so. It was all good fun, but we didn't
see any great manifest destiny or anything for We
didn't think in terms of national ocean policy and
so on. We just thought there were interesting
scientific problems to be solved. And as I look
back on it now, that period really before the war at
Scripps, we were very much in sort of ivory tower,
although as I've already indicated, we were
beginning to move into what might be called
applied oceanography as it was related to some of
these fisheries problems. But ordinarily,
though, this is still primarily research for its
own sake rather than sort of the applied research
that comes out between 1941 and 1945? Oh,
yes. The funding of the institution at that time,
the Scripps Institution, was basically all
through the University of California, since the
state funds reaching us through the university,
except that in connection with the sardine
investigations,
the federal fisheries agency did provide money to
help operate the vessel, which was the E.W.
Scripps at that time. This is after the Blue Fin.
We're getting in a number of omissions and so on in
trying to trace the history of these things. But we
were all, we were not We did not consider, as one
would probably do now that we were dependent on
federal funding to function. We were essentially
supported through the academic funds from the
University of California.
There was also support from some of the members of
the Scripps family, which was available at that
time. There has also been discussion that perhaps
the nature of oceanography has changed for the
worse and that they have lost sort of a
jack-of-all-trades approach. Would you agree
with that? Well, this is, I think, where personal
prejudice has come in, and I would agree that I feel
that one of the things that attracted me to the
field originally was the fact that we were able to
deal with a what I consider is essentially a sort of
a unified system, and where we could cross the
disciplinary boundaries, which we did very
freely at that time, between chemistry, physical
aspects, biology, geology, without anybody
raising an eyebrow. And we did try and deal with the
systems well as we could as essentially unified
systems. And I think today it's become fragmented
again by specialization, which is partly, I
think, the result of the interest of the
scientists who come into the field, but it's also
being encouraged in a sense, by the way in which the
federal funding has become more and more
specialized and fragmented. And I don't consider
this desirable at all. Most of my efforts in recent
years have been to try and bring the subject matter
back together again as much as I can.